---
---

## The Portal Project

![]({% include asset.html path="images/portal-oct-07-15.jpg" %}){: width="40%"}  
*Credit: [The Portal Project](https://portalproject.wordpress.com)*
{:.captioned}

===

The Portal Project is a long-term ecological study being conducted near Portal,
AZ. Since 1977, the site has been a primary focus of research on interactions
among rodents, ants and plants and their respective responses to climate.

![]({% include asset.html path="images/portalview.jpg" %}){: width="50%"}  
*Credit: [The Portal Project](https://portalproject.wordpress.com)*
{:.captioned}

===

The research site consists of many plots -- patches of the Arizona desert that
are intensively manipulated and repeatedly surveyed. The plots have some fixed
characteristics, such as the type of manipulation, geographic location, aspect,
etc.

![]({% include asset.html path="images/img_19771.jpg" %}){: width="40%"}  
*Credit: [The Portal Project](https://portalproject.wordpress.com)*
{:.captioned}

===

The plots have a lot of dynamic characteristics, and those changes are recorded
in repeated surveys. In particular, the animals captured during each survey are
identified to species, weighed, and measured.

![]({% include asset.html path="images/gkr2.jpg" %}){: width="50%"}  
*Credit: [The Portal Project](https://portalproject.wordpress.com)*
{:.captioned}

===

Data from the Portal project is recorded in a relational database designed for
reliable storage & rapid access to the bounty of information produced by this
long-term ecological experiment.

This lesson uses real data, which has been analyzed in over 100 publications.
The data been simplified just a little bit for the workshop, but you can
download the [full dataset](http://esapubs.org/archive/ecol/E090/118/) and work
with it using exactly the same tools we learn today.
{:.notes}

The three key tables in the relational database are:

- **plots**
- **animals**
- **species**
